****************************************
E. Experience and skills
****************************************

When you kill monsters, you gain experience points (XP). When you get enough XP,
you gain an experience level, making your character more powerful. As they gain
levels, characters gain more health, magic, and spell levels.

Additionally, the experience you gain is used to train your skills. These skills
represent proficiency with all areas of endeavour an ambitious adventurer might
need in the dungeons. They range from different weapon skills (both for close
and ranged combat) to many magical skills and several additional activities like
Dodging or Stealth. See Appendix `3. List of Skills`_ for a detailed
description of all skills present in Crawl. The ease with which a character
learns a skill depends solely on species. These aptitudes are displayed when
viewing your skills, and a full table can be viewed in aptitudes.txt (also from
the help screen during play via '?%').

You can see your character's skills by pressing the 'm' key; the higher the
level of a skill, the better you are at it. All characters start with a few
skills already trained (determined by their background), those which are not
present have to be learned from scratch. Each skill can go up to 27.

The skill screen allows you to change which skills are exercised and at what
speed. Note to new players: it is generally not necessary to finetune the skill
selection.

If you want to modify skill selection, here is how:

There are two ways to assigning skills to practise: one is an automatic mode,
which puts experience points into the skills you have used recently. The other
one is a manual mode, where you specifically select the skills to train. You can
switch between the modes by pressing '/' in the character skill screen ('m');
also be sure to read that screen's help text should you want to tweak your
skillset.

You can elect to either not practise a particular skill or to focus on it by
selecting it once or twice in the skill screen.

Dark grey skills will not be trained, so that the skill will remain static and
no experience points will be used to increase it. As a consequence, more
experience will be spent on your other skills (and thus they will increase more
quickly). Note that you cannot deselect all skills; at least one skill must be
actively exercised.

Highlighted skills are focused on and will use a higher proportion of available
experience. You can highlight as many skills as you like, though obviously if
all skills being trained are highlighted there will be no net effect.

Occasionally you may find a manual of a skill which allows you to make quick
progress in this area. When you pick it up, experience used to practise the
given skill will have twice the usual effect for a while.