****************************************
L. Licence, contact, history
****************************************

See licence.txt for information about Crawl's licensing. Most of the game's
components are licensed under version 2 or later of the GNU General Public
License; those that aren't are under compatible licenses.

Disclaimer
  This software is provided as is, with absolutely no warranty express or
  implied. Use of it is at the sole risk of the user. No liability is accepted
  for any damage to the user or to any of the user's possessions.

Contact and community information
========================================

Crawl's homepage is at:

  http://crawl.develz.org

Use this page for direct links to downloads of the most recent version. You can
also submit bug reports on the Github issue tracker at:

  https://github.com/crawl/crawl/issues

If you'd like to discuss Crawl, a good place to do so is the #dcss channel
of the Roguelikes Discord:

  https://discord.gg/GtT7xMe

There's also an active subreddit for game discussion:

  https://www.reddit.com/r/dcss/

In both of these communities, topics related to this game usually meet a warm
response, including tales of runes seized, victories (especially first
victories), and sad stories of deceased characters. There are also usually
experienced players around ready to give advice on equipment choices, tight
spots, or other dilemmas. The Discord has a relay to the Sequell IRC bot that
provides helpful information and statistics about the game.

Some players frequent the #crawl channel on the Libera IRC network, which is
also the home of Sequell and other info bots. For those interested in game
development, see the #crawl-dev channel, which is frequented by many members of
the game's development team.

History
========================================

Crawl began as Linley's Dungeon Crawl, created in 1995 by Linley Henzell.
Linley based Crawl on popular roguelikes of the time, namely Moria, Hack, and
NetHack, also taking inspiration from traditional RPGs like Ultima IV. The
object of your quest in Crawl, the Orb of Zot, was taken from Wizard's Castle,
a text adventure written in BASIC.

Linley produced Crawl versions up to 3.30, released in March 1999. Further work
was then carried out by a group of developers who released 3.40 in February
2000. Of these developers, Brent Ross emerged as the single maintainer,
producing versions until 4.0 beta 26 in 2002. Brent released an alpha version
4.1 in August 2005, which vastly overhauled the codebase and reworked many of
the game's aspects, but also considerably increased its difficulty. By this
point, Brent no longer had enough free time to develop Crawl. Hence Darshan
Shaligram, who had previously contributed many UI improvements, recruited
longtime player Erik Piper to start a new project and continue development.

Darshan and Erik aimed to incorporate ideas from the 4.1 alpha and produce a
more balanced an enjoyable game. Calling their project "Dungeon Crawl: Stone
Soup" in reference to their collaborative process, they pulled many 4.1
improvements into the 4.0 beta 26 codebase, play-testing and adjusting the
results. Dungeon Crawl: Stone Soup version 0.1 was released to USENET in
September 2006, with many additional developers subsequently joining the team.
See Darshan's own account of the project's creation here:

  https://crawl.develz.org/wordpress/the-dawn-of-stone-soup

The development of Crawl proceeds to this day, with a team of many developers
and hundreds of contributors.
