****************************************
F. Monsters
****************************************

In the caverns of Crawl, you will find a great variety of creatures, most of
which are displayed by capital or small letters of the alphabet. Many of them
would very much like to eat you. To stop them from doing this, you will
generally need to fight them. To attack a monster, stand next to it and move in
its direction; this makes you attack it with your wielded weapon. Of course,
some monsters are just too nasty to beat, and you will find that discretion is
often the better part of valour. Sneaky characters are known to choose
encounters to their liking.

There are several other ways to kill monsters. When using a bow or other ranged
weapon, the 'v' command will fire. See the section on Targeting in the Items
Chapter for more on this. Likewise, many magicians will prefer to use spells
from a safe distance. They can use the 'z' command to cast spells previously
'M'emorised. Again, see the Targeting section.

Some monsters can be friendly; friendly monsters will follow you around and
fight on your behalf. You can command your allies using the 't' key, which lets
you tell them who to attack, or else tell them to stay where they are, retreat,
or to follow you again. You can also shout to get the attention of all monsters
in range if, for some reason, you want to do that.

Some special monsters are Uniques. You can identify a unique because he, she or
they have a name and personality. Many of these come up with very nasty ideas
how to rid the dungeon of you. Treat them very carefully, particularly if you
meet one of them for the first time.

Other, even rarer, obstacles are statues. A variety of statues can appear,
ranging from harmless granite ones (who still often signify something of
interest) to really dreadful ones. Be alert whenever seeing such a statue.

When playing Crawl, you will undoubtedly want to develop a feeling for the
different monster types. For example, some monsters move unpredictably while
most attack head-on. Likewise, ranged or magic attackers will prove a different
kind of threat from melee fighters. Learn from past deaths and remember which
monsters pose the most problems. If particular monsters are giving you
trouble, try to alter your tactics for future encounters.

You can obtain information about a monster by using the 'x' (examine) command,
moving the cursor over the monster in question, and pressing 'v' to view the
monster's details; or by searching for a monster by name or symbol with '?/m'.
The details screen shows:

- The monster's name and description.

- Bars or numbers indicating its:

  * Max HP: hit points; how much damage it can take

  * AC: armour class; how well it ignores most damage

  * EV: evasion; how well it avoids being hit (and your odds of hitting it
    with your current melee attack)

  * Will: willpower; its resistance to most Hexes and similar effects.

- Its difficulty level, speed (if different from average speed), size,
  resistances, and special attacks.

- Its spells and special abilities. Monster spells and abilities are
  of four types:

  * Natural abilities are innate, non-magical effects.

  * Magical abilities are innate magical effects. They are affected
    by antimagic.

  * Divine abilities call upon the monster's god for a magical effect.
    They are prevented by silence, but not affected by antimagic.

  * Spells are cast using memorised magical words. They are both
    prevented by silence and affected by antimagic.
