****************************************
K. Mutations
****************************************

The Dungeon contains many sources of mutagenic radiation and magical
contamination, which may cause your character to gain semi-permanent mutations
if affected. You can use the 'A' command to view a list of any mutations that
you have acquired. Individual mutations can be examined in further detail by
pressing the letter they are labelled with.

Many mutations are actually beneficial to your character, but there are plenty
of nasty ones as well. Some mutations have multiple levels, each of which counts
as a single mutation.

Miscasting spells will cause magical contamination, which in turn can cause
mutations if too much contamination is accrued at once. Certain powerful
magical effects or spells (such as 'Invisibility' and 'Irradiate') also cause
contamination as a side-effect even when successful. A single use of these
effects is safe on its own, but multiple uses in short succession, or usage with
existing contamination from other sources can cause dangerous levels of
contamination.

Mutations from magical contamination are almost always harmful. Mutations can
also be caused by specific potions or by spells cast by powerful enemies found
deep in the dungeon.

It is more difficult to get rid of bad mutations than to get one. Using potions
of mutation will remove a number of your current mutations, but will give you
more mutations. These might be better to your taste. However, the only sure-fire
ways is to join the gods Zin or Jiyva, each of whom provides some remedy against
mutations.

Demonspawn are a special case. Characters of this species get certain special
mutations as they gain levels; these are listed in cyan. They are permanent and
can never be removed. If one of your Demonspawn powers has been augmented by a
random mutation, it is displayed in a lighter colour.

Many a species starts with some special intrinsic features, like the greater
speed of Felids or Spriggans, or the claws of Trolls and Ghouls. These are
often, but not always, like a preset mutation. In case such an innate feature
gets amplified by an ordinary mutation, it is displayed in a light blue colour.
Some of these innate features will provide an activated ability, which can be
used with the 'a' command.

Some mutations are only temporary and will dissipate after slaying more enemies.
These are listed in purple on the list of mutations, and marked as temporary.