****************************************
N. Philosophy (pas de faq)
****************************************

In a nutshell: This game aims to be a tactical fantasy-themed dungeon crawl. We
strive for strategy being a concern, too, and for exquisite gameplay and
interface. However, don't expect plots or quests.

You may ponder about the wisdom of certain design decisions of Crawl. This
section tries to explain some of them. It could also be of interest if you are
used to other roguelikes and want a bit of background on the differences. Prime
mainstays of Crawl development are the following, most of which are explained in
more detail below. Note that many of these date back to Linley's first versions.

Major design goals
  * challenging and random gameplay, with skill making a real difference
  * meaningful decisions (no no-brainers)
  * avoidance of grinding (no scumming)
  * gameplay supporting painless interface and newbie support

Minor design goals
  * clarity (playability without need for spoilers)
  * internal consistency
  * replayability (using branches, species, playing styles and gods)
  * proper use of out of depth monsters

Balance
========================================

The notions of balance, or being imbalanced, are extremely vague. Here is our
definition: Crawl is designed to be a challenging game, and is also renowned for
its randomness. However, this does not mean that wins are an arbitrary matter of
luck: the skill of players will have the largest impact. So, yes, there may be
situations where you are doomed - no action could have saved your life. But
then, from the midgame on, most deaths are not of this type: By this stage,
almost all casualties can be traced back to actual mistakes; if not tactical
ones, then of a strategical type, like wrong skilling (too broad or too narrow),
unwise use of resources (too conservative or too liberal), or wrong decisions
about branch/god/gear.

The possibility of unavoidable deaths is a larger topic in computer games.
Ideally, a game like this would be really challenging and have both random
layout and random course of action, yet still be winnable with perfect play.
This goal seems out of reach. Thus, computer games can be soft in the sense that
optimal play ensures a win. Apart from puzzles, though, this means that the game
is solved from the outset; this is where the lack of a human game-master is
obvious. Alternatively, they can be hard in the sense that unavoidable deaths
can occur. We feel that the latter choice provides much more fun in the long
run.

Crawl has a huge number of handmade vaults/maps to tweak the randomness. While
the placement, and often parts of the contents, of such vaults are random as
well, they provide several advantages: vaults offer challenges that are very
hard to get via just random monster and layout generation; they may centre on
some theme, providing additional immersion; finally, they will often contain
some loot, forcing players to decide between safety and greed.

(The next topic can also be filed under balance; see Replayability for what
balance does not mean to us.)

Crusade against no-brainers
========================================

A very important point in Crawl is steering away from no-brainers. Speaking
about games in general, wherever there's a no-brainer, that means the
development team put a lot of effort into providing a "choice" that's really not
an interesting choice at all. And that's a horrible lost opportunity for fun.
Examples for this are the resistances: there are very few permanent sources,
most involve a choice (like rings or specific armour) or are only semi-permanent
(like mutations). Another example is the absence of clear-cut best items, which
comes from the fact that most artefacts are randomly generated. Furthermore,
even non-random artefacts cannot be wished for, as scrolls of acquirement
produce random items in general. Likewise, there are no sure-fire means of life
saving (the closest equivalents are scrolls of blinking, and good religious
standings for some deities).

Anti-grinding
========================================

Another basic design principle is avoidance of grinding (also known as
scumming). These are activities that have low risk, take a lot of time, and
bring some reward. This is bad for a game's design because it encourages players
to bore themselves. Even worse, it may be optimal to do so. We try to avoid
this!

This explains why shops don't buy: otherwise players would hoover the dungeon
for items to sell. Not messing with lighting also falls into this category:
there might be a benefit to mood when players have to carry candles/torches,
but we don't see any gameplay benefit. The deep tactical gameplay Crawl aims
for necessitates permanent dungeon levels. Many a time characters have to choose
between descending or battling. While caution is a virtue in Crawl, as it is in
many other roguelikes, there are strong forces driving characters deeper.

Interface
========================================

The interface is radically designed to make gameplay easy - this sounds trivial,
but we mean it. All tedious, but necessary, chores should be automated. Examples
are long-distance travel, exploration and taking notes. Also, we try to cater
for different preferences: both ASCII and tiles are supported; as are vi-keys
and numpad. Documentation is plenty, context-specific and always available
in-game. Finally, we ease getting started via tutorials.

Clarity
========================================

Things ought to work in an intuitive way. Crawl definitely is winnable without
spoiler access. Concerning important but hidden details (i.e. facts subject to
spoilers) our policy is this: the joy of discovering something spoily is nice,
once. (And disappears before it can start if you feel you need to read spoilers
- a legitimate feeling.) The joy of dealing with ever-changing, unexpected and
challenging strategic and tactical situations that arise out of transparent
rules, on the other hand, is nice again and again. That said, we believe that
qualitative feedback is often better than precise numbers.

In concrete terms, we either spell out a gameplay mechanic explicitly (either in
the manual, or by in-game feedback) or leave it to min-maxers if we feel that
the naive approach is good enough.

Consistency
========================================

While there is no plot to speak of, the game should still be set in a consistent
Crawl universe. For example, names of artefacts should fit the mood, vaults
should be sensibly placed and monsters should somehow fit as well. Essentially,
this is about player immersion. As such, it's good to have in mind, but
consistency is always secondary to gameplay. A typical example is player vs.
monster behaviour: while we try to make these identical (or similar), there are
good reasons for keeping them distinct in certain cases.

Replayability
========================================

This is actually quite important, but in some sense just a corollary to the
major design goals. Besides these, there are several other points helping to
make playing Crawl fun over and over again:

Diversity
  whenever there are choices to the player, be that choice of species, god,
  weapon or spell, the various options should be genuinely different. It is no
  good to provide dozens of weapons with different names (and perhaps even
  numbers) if, in the end, they all play the same.

Many different species
  This is partly due to the skills and aptitude system. Similarly important are
  the built-in starting bonuses/handicaps of species; these often have great
  impact on play. To us, balance does not mean that all combinations of
  background and species play equally well! Some are much more challenging than
  others, and this is fine with us. Each species has at least some backgrounds
  playing rather well, though.

Dungeon layout
  Even veteran players may find the Tomb or the Hells exciting (which are
  designed such that life endangering situations can always pop up). These and
  other branches may or may not fit a given character's buildup. By the way, we
  strongly believe that games are pointless if you can reach the invincible
  state.

Religion
  This addresses new players, as getting to the Temple and choosing a god
  becomes the first major task of most games. But religion is also a point in
  favour of replayability for experienced players, since the choice of god can
  matter as much as species does.

Playing styles
  Related to, but encompassing, species, background, god are fundamentally
  different playing styles like melee oriented fighter, stabber, etc. Deciding
  on whether (and when!) to make a transition of style can make or break games.

Out of the depths
========================================

From time to time a discussion about Crawl's unfair OOD (out of depth) monsters
turns up, like a dragon on the second dungeon level. These are not bugs!
Actually, they are part of the randomness design goal. In this case, they also
serve as additional motivation: in many situations, the OOD monster can be
survived somehow, and the mental bond with the character will then surely grow.
OOD monsters also help to keep players on their toes by making shallow levels
still not trivial. In a similar vein, early trips to the Abyss are not deficits:
there's more than one way out, and successfully escaping is exciting for anyone.